# Cloud
A document describing how federal agencies can save 80% of their IT budget by outsourcing to the cloud






Escaping the IT Trap:
How to Cut IT Costs in BLM by Two-Thirds 
(A prototype for Federal agencies)








Patrick Stingley
Chief Technical Officer
Bureau of Land Management
August 6, 2014

Executive Overview
This document describes how a 10,000 person bureau can significantly reduce its Information Technology investment through outsourcing, cloud computing and innovative engineering.
Despite consolidating 75% of its data centers, the operating costs for these sites and the Bureau as a whole actually went up.   This makes sense, in retrospect, because simply moving a computer system from one place to another shouldn’t result in any particular savings.  There were some reductions in personnel, buy by in large the effect was higher costs, due to increased telecommunications costs.  For there to be real savings, the applications would have to be re-written to be efficient in the new architecture.  The typical cost to re-write a major application is about $1M and a year long effort.  The Bureau has a track record of ballooning budgets and failed projects.   Much of this is probably due to the contracting process.  With Time and Materials, and many other kinds of contracts, the vendor has an incentive to expand the scope of the work, in order to increase revenue and thus profits.  This document proposes outsourcing the back-end processing and providing the vendor with a set revenue, which flips things around and gives the vendor the incentive to become more efficient.   One of the main things the Bureau does is permitting, whether the permit is to drill for oil, to graze on public lands, or to hold the Burning Man Festival, all of these are permitting processes.  The suggestion is to contract with a company that specializes in permitting, let that company handle the back end processes for the Bureau.  In one scenario, the vendor puts up a website for the prospective land users to fill in.  The user submits their form electronically, along with an electronic payment.  The vendor takes a certain percentage of the payment and the rest goes to BLM and the Treasury.  In the meantime the form goes to the appropriate commodity manager in BLM, who evaluates it and either issues the permit or not.  (The revenue collection could also be done by BLM and split out to the vendor, the result is the same, the vendor gets a specific percentage, which induces them to become more efficient.)  Currently 30 states are using this approach for their permitting.  Some states have an IT budget of zero!  The way this works best is to let the high dollar permits subsidize subsequent workflows.  For this to become a reality, would require a change in federal appropriations. 
The second prong of this paper suggests centralizing software and using desktop virtualization through mobile phones to deliver the software services employees need.   This approach has been demonstrated and is currently being evaluated during the wildfires in Oregon.  (If it can work in the midst of a fire, it should be able to work in an office environment.)  The models indicate that this kind of architecture should result in significant savings, while supporting telework and the highly mobile workforce that has always characterized BLM.  It also suggests doing as many Americans have done and migrating off of terrestrial telephone service in favor of mobile phones.   The Bureau has already issued cellphones to 60% of its workforce.  Completing this process would allow the Bureau to eliminate Private Branch Exchanges (PBXs), expensive routers and $1,200 desktop telephones.
The third method of achieving savings is by using Virtual Private Networks over broad band Internet, as opposed to relying on telephony delivered under the Networx contract.   Under Networx, the government commonly pays $1,800/mo to provide 12Mbps to an entire office, when a 4G cell phone commonly gets 15Mbps and costs less than $100/mo. 
The final suggestion in this paper is for the Bureau to completely outsource its Geographic Information System (GIS).  As it currently stands the Bureau runs six different server farms; each different.  Two of them run completely different databases, which causes interminable problems in terms of data inconsistencies.  Outsourcing the GIS to the vendor and porting the data from these server farms to a single server architecture at the vendor would solve these problems because all of the data would be in the same database.
Unfortunately, the Bureau doesn’t have the wherewithal to make these changes under its own power.  The Bureau would need high level government support.   
The numbers in this document are approximate, but the best that could be found at the present.  The initial estimates (shown) were based on the OMB A-11/Exhibit 53 information submitted to Congress.  These numbers were averaged with the actuals as well as to the planned spending for FY14 and 15 where available.  The estimates in 3 of 4 areas varied less than 10%.  The Desktop computing estimate was within parameters for an initial estimate, though much of the data was fuzzy due to a re-organization across the Bureau, affecting estimates of personnel costs.  Because of the scope of the changes suggested and the ripple effects that would ensue, further precision is unnecessary, in all cases, the outcomes consistently point to significant savings that would be achievable through the measures described herein.  If the estimated savings in this document are added up, the total comes to $116M, but conversion costs and other factors may reduce these savings.  It is impossible to guess the actual savings until cloud hosting becomes a reality and conversion strategies (along with their costs) are developed, but it appears at this point that the initial estimate of $80M is a very good one.
Those measures that are successful could then serve as a proof of concept for other Bureaus and Agencies across the government and potentially lead to enormous government wide savings and efficiencies.

Introduction:
This paper describes a cost model and offers the outline of a plan whereby the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) could reduce its annual recurring Information Technology (IT) investments by as much as two thirds.  This would be accomplished by fully embracing cloud computing and updating the Bureau’s Information Technology infrastructure to reflect the new computing paradigm.  Our preliminary analysis has so far identified well over $80M in potential cost reductions.  It is entirely possible that when detailed analysis is completed, the overall savings to the Bureau could be much higher.  If a significant amount of the Information Technology  functions and staff are no longer within the Bureau, it is likely there will be ripple effects throughout, perhaps allowing other  parts of the organization such as contracts, human resources, and others to reduce costs as well.  Although these latent effects are anticipated, they have not been calculated into the cost model.
One of the most basic premises behind cloud computing is that the customer does not have hardware or software at his site.  Information services necessary to the organization’s business operations are managed by commercial experts and are accessed over the Internet.  Pushing IT out of the internal federal infrastructure to external service providers allows the organization to focus on its primary business mission and internal process improvements, while the cloud vendor’s experts  handle the computing technologies.  Due to the economies of scale and other factors, commercial providers can deliver superior service at lower costs than those that can be obtained within the Bureau.
Conversion to a cloud-based architecture is not a one-step process.  Running applications in the cloud requires high speed Wide Area Network (WAN) data communications in order to access and interact with the applications after they have been migrated, so part of planning for a move to a cloud must include addressing telecommunications concerns.   
Applications that are designed to work on computers operated on local area networks don’t necessarily work well, or efficiently, in a cloud environment. This may drive the need to completely re-write the applications.   Because the application is not local to the user’s computer, applications are generally adjusted to allow them to deliver their content to remote users who may be using laptops, thin clients or even mobile devices.
Over the last four years the Bureau has made major strides in positioning itself to migrate its applications to the cloud, by virtualizing nearly 500 of our applications, and sending them to our data center in Denver to be run.   Having accomplished this, moving these applications to a cloud provider is an easy next step.  While our effort in this regard has been wonderful, the net result has been anything but.  It turns out that our overall annual costs have increased by nearly $2M, driven primarily by demands for more bandwidth.  Migrating to a cloud computing environment by itself is not enough to accomplish savings.  Such a move must be attacked holistically, with planning to include everything from the type of cloud operations to the user’s fingertips, and all points in between.  
As information technology is outsourced to the cloud, there is less need for IT staff within the organization.  Fortunately, in the last few years, the Department of the Interior has published policy stating that the IT staffs in its bureaus are to ultimately begin working directly for the Department.  This is especially beneficial for BLM personnel because as these technologists are freed up from the day to day work in the Bureau, they become available resources for other parts of the Department.
This document reflects the shifts in costs from an organization with its own internal IT resources, to one that is a consumer of services, relying on technologists outside of the Bureau to provide the hands-on technical work that is required.  This analysis uses a four-pronged approach to describing these changes and the cost savings to be realized from each.  The four prongs are: Outsourced Workflows; Desktop Automation; Telecommunications; and Geospatial Information Systems (GIS), Data Centers and Storage. 
Outsourced Workflows
Every computer sciences student when first learning to program, is taught to make flow charts.  A flow chart graphically describes the processes that a program (an application) is supposed to do.  Eventually, people began using flow charts to specifically document business processes; these are called workflows.    In recent years, it has been realized that such workflow flow charts can actually be employed to automate the business processes that the applications perform.  BLM headquarters has workflows documenting many of the business processes the Bureau performs.  The Bureau has recently begun using Business Process Management tools, servers on which the workflows are loaded and which automatically execute them.   In so doing, entire segments of the organization can become automated.  This approach holds significant advantages because it doesn’t create the silos that a systems development approach tended to do.  Workflow automation is also 10 – 100 times less expensive to implement than application systems built from scratch.  Since as mentioned earlier, migrating to a cloud environment often requires substantial re-development of applications, generally the better solution is to abandon the legacy application and replace it wholesale with a workflow, an approach the Bureau has recently begun pursuing.   While the approach is valuable in identifying (and often improving) business processes, and greatly reducing development costs, it would still require significant engineering/ operations support expenditures to run the workflows for an extended period of time.
The solution to this issue is as follows:  There are companies that specialize in running workflows on behalf of government agencies.  One of them runs permitting workflows for 30 state level organizations across the country.  In many cases, these states have been able to approach zero-dollar IT budgets, by using a shared revenue model.  In this model, the company displays a web page front end for a state organization’s workflow that allows a person to apply for a permit, for example, a hunting license. The company takes the information the user submits and routes it to the appropriate government official to review the application.  It takes a portion of the fee for itself and sends the balance to the bank account specified by the State.  The government official reviews and either approves or disapproves the application and the company either sends back the approval/disproval document or it e-mails an electronic document back to the applicant for them to print for themselves.  .  
The state doesn’t need to invest in hardware, software, maintenance or IT staff; the partner company develops the workflows at its own cost.  These companies generally start with the most lucrative permitting workflows, and use them to subsidize development of subsequent permitting processes.  Although willing to work under other types of contractual arrangements, the shared revenue model is one that makes a good case for outsourcing.   With this approach, instead of spending millions of dollars and risking multi- million dollar cost overruns developing applications as in the past, the agency simply outsources the system to a company that specializes in this kind of business.  There is at least one company providing these services for 30 states across the country, thus attesting to their ability to deliver a solid service.  
Detailed below are representative costs and savings from employing the outsourcing model, based primarily on costs taken from BLM’s 2016 Exhibit 53.


Desktop Automation
The high cost of maintaining desktop computers (around $2K/unit/Yr.) is driven primarily by the amount of touch labor necessary to keep the software working, whether installing it, fixing it, patching it, uninstalling it, etc.  In comparison, it is notable how little maintenance is required by mobile devices.
As the applications are relocated from the user’s computer to the cloud, they will either be delivered by web browser interfaces, or by virtual desktop integration (VDI) software such as Citrix.  Mobile devices can display either kind of interface.
It doesn’t take much processor power to display a web page or a virtual desktop.  Mobile devices have more than enough processing and graphics capability to be used in this way.  The image on the left below shows a smartphone with a Bluetooth keyboard attached to a full sized monitor, with the assistance of a $39.00 VGA adapter.  In this case, it is editing documents using Google Docs.  The image on the right shows a map from the Bureau’s eGIS application that was created using this smartphone.  This setup shows how a tablet can be used in a dual display configuration while a smartphone is used both as the hot spot for the tablet and as a track pad. 


Migrating away from applications loaded on desktop computers and using Citrix to display a virtual desktop to a mobile device has many advantages.
1.  Since it started surveying the west with chains and donkeys, the BLM has always had a highly mobile workforce.  Deskbound computing has never been well suited to supporting workers outside the office.  Using a mobile device as their primary computing platform will allow BLM employees to take their offices with them, whether at home (teleworking), in the field, or back in the office.
2. Using central server application architectures, like Google Docs or the Citrix environment centralizes the data, which allows it to be shared, worked with in a collaborative manner, and managed much more effectively than in the Bureau’s current decentralized, fragmented architecture.
3. The primary reason that working with centrist architectures such as eGIS has been difficult in the past has been the need for significantly greater bandwidth and the high cost thereof.  It is common for BLM offices to pay $1,800/mo. for a 12Mbps data line to be shared among all of the employees in an office (including for telephony).  The smartphone in these photos typically delivers 15Mbps and the government pays $60.00/mo. for the data plan.  Users have noticed this and have taken to teleworking because the bandwidth in their homes is so much better than in the offices.
4. Today, 60% of Bureau employees have a government furnished mobile device.  To provide the remainder of the Bureau with wireless devices would require an increase of $1.8M, which will be more than offset by the reduction in support costs...  


Conversion costs to Citrix are not assumed in this spreadsheet because the Bureau currently operates 6 Citrix infrastructures, which are used primarily for the operation of ESRI ARCGIS software, the primary GIS engine for the Bureau.  The Citrix licenses could be coalesced into a single site or furnished to a cloud vendor to host both GIS and other applications for delivery via Citrix to users.  The Bureau’s eGIS is also accessed through Citrix and as a part of that application, MS Office is available through the Citrix interface. The Bureau has an enterprise license for Microsoft, so logically, Office could be extended for delivery by the other 5 Citrix infrastructures.  These actions will be dependent to a considerable extent on the nature of the cloud provider services that are chosen.
Line 25 of the spreadsheet mentions the 11,000 software items on the BLM network.  It is believed that by putting software behind Citrix and using license management, the Bureau would save even more money by effective use of the licenses it does have and by eliminating obsolete and un-used software packages from the network.  Again, this will depend on the interaction with the 3rd party delivering the Citrix DVI.
Telecommunications
The Bureau has been strangled for years by the inadequacy of the DOI network for meeting BLM needs.  ESN and Networx deliver network services that are hundreds of times more expensive with far less bandwidth than what BLM employees enjoy in their homes.  The scenario costed out below is predicated on the following:  If a BLM employee can sit in their own home and access the BLM network using a VPN over their own wireless router and Internet connection, why can’t that same employee use a VPN within a BLM building to do the same thing?  In fact, any employee sitting at their desk using a smartphone tethered to their computer to VPN into the network is doing just that.
 The architecture described herein suggests using the same Cisco 5505 VPN router firewall as the Bureau is currently using in 155 smaller sites across the west.  This cost model suggests that for every 20 people in an office,   a business-class broadband Internet connection would be ordered (typically at $100/Mo.) and the Cisco 5505 would be used to establish the VPN, act as its firewall and provide wireless capability.  If an office has 40 employees, it would get two, etc.  This does not replace the Internet capability of the mobile phones, it augments it, thereby providing wireless capability to devices such as printers in the office.  In addition, the 5505s can be used with the existing wired infrastructure.  The 5505s cost less than $500 apiece, which means that wholesale replacement of the existing routers in the Bureau with these 5505s would cost less than the annual maintenance on the existing ones.  The additional bandwidth this approach delivers makes the Steelhead WAN Optimization Devices completely unnecessary.  The 5505s are inexpensive enough and simple enough that replacements could be FedExed out overnight in case of a failure (or a spare kept on each site).
The diagram below shows the cost savings with this approach.



Data Centers, Storage & GIS
Geospatial Information Systems are lumped together with Data Centers and Storage because when the GIS is outsourced, the data the application operates on has to be in close proximity.  (Much of the poor performance of GIS is due to the time it takes to load the data into the map.)  Electronic representations of the bureau’s land records, land patents, permits etc. also need to be close by (in the cloud) in order for them to be used efficiently by the GIS.  In all, the Bureau is responsible for approximately 430 terabytes of data, for which it currently pays $11,000 per TeraByte (TB).
For fiduciary reasons, it is necessary that the government maintain a repository copy of its data within a federal data center.  The Earth Resources Observation and Science center (EROS), run by the United States Geological Survey (USGS) holds massive amounts of data in a highly secure facility because of the Landsat satellite system they operate, so they would be a good choice to provide storage to meet this need.  The same $11,000 per TB cost is used for storing the data at EROS, even though it is hoped that they have found less expensive storage 
The Bureau of Land Management is not staffed to take on other customers in its data centers.  It has not developed a service catalog, SLAs or a service cost model, and it would be costly to do so.  It is unlikely that current staffing levels would be able to provide the level of service a customer would require.  Furthermore, managing data centers is not core mission for the Bureau of Land Management, so this model anticipates that neither the National Operations Center, nor any other BLM data center will continue to operate once the cloud implementations of workflow and GIS become operational.  Once the Bureau has moved its GIS operations to the cloud and has sent its master copies of the data to USGS at EROS it can then turn its Denver Data Center over to the Department, which will either turn it over other occupants, such as USGS or IBC, or operate the Denver center itself, depending on the goals of the hosting team.  
The combination of outsourcing the GIS and closing data centers eliminates a number of costs for the Bureau, as shown in the spreadsheet below:


Note, ESRI was asked to provide some idea about what hosting ArcMap via VDI would cost but was not able to get the figures cleared by their management in time for this document, so the estimate in this spreadsheet was arrived at by doubling the current ESRI contract.
Summary
Although there is additional planning and preparatory work that needs to be done, it appears certain that the Bureau can save well over $80M by outsourcing its IT, while providing better service and more effectively supporting its highly mobile workforce.

